welcome to my second third third live
stream
technical difficulties
i set up a link and prepared
for a live stream and well i don't know
what happened but anyway i couldn't get
on so i had to reset it up all over
again
and here we are
so um
i apologize to the people who are
waiting at the other one when you come
back to this one
[Laughter]
yes because of the screw up i don't know
what the technical difficulty is i
thought that having done two practice
ones that would be enough
for me to know exactly how to use this
live stream thing on youtube
as it is
clearly i'm not an aficionado yet so
let's see how we go here hopefully i can
be heard
um i'm going to
privilege the
patreon so you can become a patreon of
mine of course and the patrons have
asked me questions first and then i'll
get to
the very many twitter questions so i'm
just
very relaxed here at the moment because
i have a
vast number of deep questions to get
through
and so i could be here for a while
now
[Laughter]
jen my partner that i live with
suggested that i should
set a timer
so that way i don't go running overtime
but
i i can imagine what i would do i would
see the five minute timer let's say and
realize when the five minutes is up that
i hadn't answered the question and have
to reset the time rule over again so i
don't think that would help and maybe
just um sitting back relaxing and taking
my time with each of the questions no
matter how deep it's probably the best
way to go
so
um beginning with mart van meegan from
patreon he says hi brett i was watching
competitive rocket league recently and
it dawned on me that these professional
gamers are doing things that the
programmers could never have imagined
when they made the game that's
undoubtedly true of many
other games as well i've a gut feeling
has something to do with universality
but i have no coherent thoughts maybe
you do
well
not beyond the fact that
anytime a human being creates a system
which could be a game or it could be
a method of printing
they could invent the pencil then of
course any tool that a human being
invents
is going to be used by other human
beings in completely unpredictable ways
and so yes of course
it has something to do with universality
the creativity of people so an invention
is going to be used by people in
creative and different unusual ways i
mean i played skyrim there for a while
and people
weren't simply playing skyrim i mean
they would gather there yeah well well
sorry
not skyrim what was the the online
anyway online games in general people
use not merely to play the game but to
gather together and to even have parties
and stuff and have meetups and um so
yeah of course uh i'm sure the person
who
invented the
early systems of writing
may not have imagined all the different
uses that writing would then be put to
possibly it was just used initially to
record messages or to record official
documents let's say
who knows if they would have been able
to imagine scripts for movies and that
kind of thing so same kind of thing
someone invents a game and the users of
the game the players are going to come
up with interesting things to do that
the programs could not have possibly
foreseen yeah
cody baldwin asks
this is a bit of a tongue-in-cheek
interpretation of the anti-natalist
argument if suffering is a result of
lacking knowledge all evils are caused
by insufficient knowledge and potential
knowledge growth is infinite then that
means there's no way to create
consciousness without promising
suffering
is it morally wrong then to have a
biological baby
so i have to disagree with the premise
of the question
that
that means there's no way to create
consciousness without
promising suffering
i
no it's not that you're all suffering is
the result of lacking knowledge all
evils are caused by insufficient
knowledge yes
but that doesn't mean that insufficient
knowledge
itself
necessarily causes
evil there are problems in the world
one problem okay caused by insufficient
knowledge is suffering well it labels a
vast spectrum of different experiences a
person can go through call them
suffering but there's a whole bunch of
problems caused by insufficient
knowledge that aren't anything like that
that in fact do the opposite they
provide joy
an unproblematic state is death
or that's what that's david deutsch's
way of putting things
all life is problem solving that's karl
popper's way of putting things
so
when we say
that when david deutsch points out this
is the principle of optimism all evils
are caused by insufficient knowledge
one such evil is suffering
and i am of the opinion
that suffering is a soluble problem that
all the different instances of suffering
can be solved leaving us with still
problems still insufficient knowledge
that's always going to be the case
but
the problems that we will be solving
will not involve the
solving of suffering because they will
have been solved now we're talking about
a distant future here
and of course there could always be the
thing that
comes out of the dark cosmos somewhere
that could cause a suffering but
everything that we think of now as
suffering
all the physical body pains that are
unpleasant to us can be done away with
all diseases can be cured
death of loved ones can be fixed because
they don't have to die
traffic accidents can be avoided all of
these things that cause suffering
can be fixed so suffering itself is a
soluble problem
now at the moment it's not so then the
antenatalists might very well go and
this is the problem by the way because
of the fact that suffering
is
soluble it can't be a basis for morality
because once you've solved suffering
and as i say i think you can once you've
solved all suffering you've still got a
problem of what to do next you're still
what should you do
and it won't be about minimizing
suffering at that point because there
will be zero
suffering and we shouldn't really be
thinking about in terms of
maximizing happiness or well-being
either
because we've moved so far away
from
a place where
we have to worry about differences in
well-being that it's just different
species of well-being so do we maximize
off in this direction or that direction
well this is why having these bases for
morality is wrong and just
regarding morality rather as the solving
of moral problems as science as the
solving of scientific problems is really
the way to conceive of things but at the
moment we have heuristics which are
useful
avoid suffering where we can and
increase well-being and
so on you know these kinds of things but
given that today at the moment
given that today
we do have this problem of suffering how
do we respond to the anti-natalists
or what a
poverty stricken
uh conception of people that is
firstly the idea that um that people are
just born into this world suffering or
potentially suffering they're also born
into this world potentially experiencing
a lot of joy and for every year that
goes by the amount of suffering
decreases and the amount of joy
increases and moreover
moreover denying potential parents
denying potential parents
uh the joy the the the incomparable joy
of having children
itself is a cause of suffering massive
suffering for the parents for the people
already alive
so yeah i think that people and this
will become increasingly more true
people are sources of joy
more than experiences of suffering
suffering
so i think that's the way to look at it
is so is it morally wrong then to have
biological baby and i know cody doesn't
um
really think that as he says
tongue-in-cheek
no it's one of the most moral things you
can do
is to have a child to bring a child into
the world
so
um
we aren't promising suffering to
children at all we certainly shouldn't
be
the world isn't promising them suffering
really
things can go wrong and
but parents can do a more or less good
job and can
tend in the direction of minimizing
suffering now of course eventually
people grow up and um
you know they they
they make their own mistakes and people
you know
youngsters make their own mistakes and
that can cause suffering right now
because now we don't know
but being in a position of ignorance is
the position that we are always in any
way at any time no matter how far into
the distant future we have to go and
maybe the child that's born
tomorrow
or is decided on being born at some
point in the future is the one that is
instrumental
key crucial in solving the problem of
suffering
which is another reason why we should
have more children
and
uh counter the antenatalists
some of the worst pessimists of all i
think
vish
might be a bit technical but how are the
many theories of qm structured how are
for example
qft quantum field theory qed
quantum electrodynamics
qcd quantum chromodynamics
the standard model and quantum
computation related to each other are
they all consistent with each other and
the many worlds interpreted
wow um vish coming in
very hot on this one okay so this is a
challenge so i'm firstly
although i did undergraduate stuff in
physics and i did you know sort of
masters in astrophysics
um i may very well butcher this because
i'm not a professional physicist
but you know i've tried to keep up
as a lay person
in these areas
so what i would say in response to that
kind of question it's kind of like
asking um
how are the many different theories of
biology structured how are for example
uh zoology
ornithology uh botany and so on and and
and maybe we would say uh the theory of
evolution and neo-darwinism and the
theory of genetics uh how are these
things related are they consistent with
each other
yes they have to be consistent with each
other because they're all basically
different ways of looking at the same
thing
or a better way to put it perhaps is
there is a
subject area call it quantum mechanics
i'd rather call it quantum theory
and then there are
disciplines within those areas or areas
of focus that some physicists focus on
more than others so let's try and tease
these out
so quantum mechanic quantum theory is
the broadest possible umbrella under
which these things fall
i'm gonna get in trouble off real
physicists for saying this i'm sure
quantum field theory is
where you bring in
special relativity and so special
relativity
considering how
particles move at
close to the speed of light then things
begin to change and so
uniting special relativity and quantum
mechanics
using a field approach which is what
physicists do physicists like waves this
is like particles physics like fields
and so this is a way of bringing these
two otherwise disparate branches of
physics together quantum mechanics and
special relativity we can't we don't
know how to bring together
quantum
theory and general relativity we can't
do that we don't know how to incorporate
gravity but we can incorporate the
effects of special relativity and
there's your quantum field theory and
then quantum field theory has within it
sub genres as well quantum
electrodynamics charged particles so how
charged particles move around
um you know how do electrons move around
how do protons move around
in in fields at the quantum level what's
going on there quantum chromodynamics
bringing in the strong force i believe
gluons and that kind of thing how do
they behave quantum mechanically
so that's what that is so quantum
electrodynamics and quantum
chromodynamics i believe
are
species of quantum field theory quantum
field theory is a thing to try and help
understand how to
understand all this stuff the quantum
stuff
with relativistic effects and what goes
on there is we regard
particles as excitations of a field and
the field is in some sense more
fundamental than the particles i don't
like to think about it that way i just
like to think well what are particles
well excitations of the field given this
theory we can still regard them as
fundamental there's a fundamental way
that the field can
be excited it can be excited in one way
and give you an electron and cite it in
a different way and give you a a
photon let's say
the standard model the standard model is
specifically that part of quantum
mechanics focused on just what the
particles themselves are doing
quantum mechanics is a
theory that purports to govern
everything in the universe right living
inside gravity space time
but if you just focused on you know
what's matter made out of well matter is
made out of
atoms the atoms consist of protons and
neutrons the protons neutrons are made
out of quarks up and down quarks
uh or they're in the nucleus orbited by
electrons electrons are a species of
lepton uh there are different kinds of
leptons like muon i think is one all
these
then you've got bosons bosons which
mediate the forces you know and so in
the case of the electromagnetic force
you've got photons which do that then
you've got
gluons which mediate the strong force
and so you've got all these particles
they call it the particle zoo and so
that's the standard model and so it's a
sub genre
under the umbrella of quantum theory and
then quantum computation well quantum
computation again
it's a sub genre within
quantum
theory it just brings in computation
says what can a computer do given these
things are made out of matter they're
made out of physical stuff so um
what limits does that impose or what
does it allow rather
um
that's the theory of quantum computation
so
a vicious question then goes on to say
how they relate to each other just like
that i would say umbrella term and then
sub disciplines within
the era of quantum mechanics
are they all consistently with each
other yes
in the same way that zoology and botany
are consistent with biology
and the many worlds interpretation yes
they have to be all of these things in
fact can only be understood best
through the many worlds interpretation
which is just
applying realism to
understanding the experiments of quantum
theory
and moreover trying to understand what
the formalism is telling us so when we
look at something like the schrodinger
wave equation
and it says that all of these different
possibilities
are the thing that caused this one thing
we observed to happen well all those
different possibilities really exist
because if they're all coming to bear on
you know what actually does happen then
they all really exist they're causal so
they're there in reality
so that's all the many world
interpretation is kind of about
thanks vish how's it
as i say really coming in hard with that
one
rj hey brett obsessed with all your
content and deutsches as well
many media outlets and accredited
journals are prophesying for most major
coastal cities to be underwater by 2060
is this the same blind pessimism as peak
oil forecasts in the 90s and the
malthusian trap in the 18th century yes
absolutely
any
prediction
of that kind is of course as you say
actually a prophecy
we cannot know what things will be like
here on planet earth in 2016. we don't
know
what a prophet of that kind presumes is
that
given what we understand now of let's
say climate science
extrapolating to 2060 let's say
and i assume they're using the worst
possible estimations for the rate at
which the
polar ice caps would melt and therefore
sea levels would rise
assuming nothing is done
assuming nothing is done then yeah
absolutely
maybe the worst could happen but of
course
people are here who are on planet earth
if we can cause the problem we can undo
the problem problems are soluble there's
nothing inherent
in
melting polar ice caps which means that
we cannot undo the problem we know of
ways to cool the globe in theory in
principle just put big enough mirrors in
the sky and it will shine the stuff back
towards the sun i mean
yeah sure expensive sure engineering
problem but in principle we know how to
do this and so
uh will coastal cities be underwater in
2016 no
i would say most won't be
or you could just build walls couldn't
you i mean that would be a simple
low-tech solution to this
amsterdam and most of the netherlands i
believe would be
underwater now if they weren't
using technology to keep the place
effectively afloat
because they're
extremely smart people great engineering
tradition they're already doing what
every other place could do they can
teach the world how you stop being
inundated by the ocean when you live
adjacent to it okay so yeah
so i better go so that's the patreons
thank you to my patreons for asking
those questions adil
thank you for your contribution um we'll
prioritize you next
hi brett could you please explain the
difference between computational
universality and explanatory university
your first ally and why is the
distinction pretty important yes so this
goes to the distinction between
hardware and software
computational universality is what the
typical computer approximately has we
say approximately has because in order
to be truly universal in other words to
run any program that can possibly be
written
you would need an infinite amount of
memory because some programs would
require an infinite amount of memory so
we can only approximate that but you
know we don't need to necessarily
um
simulate stuff let's say that requires
infinite memory um we can just
approximate it okay so that's that
a computational universality
implies the existence of a computer that
can do the work of absolutely any other
computer that can be built a single
device that can do the work of any other
and so that is as i say approximately
desktop computers this is what turing's
great insight was church turing post i
think these these guys got there and
figured out that not only was there this
one computer that could do the work of
any other
but also you know
incorporating the work of david deutsch
there is that computer that can simulate
efficiently
any physical process any possible
physical process can be computed by a
this particular device
so this is about the hardware what the
hardware can do you can write programs
for this computer programs for this bit
of hardware
that can
do anything that any other processor can
simulate any other process out there
from atoms through to galaxies and
literally anything in between
and that includes people of course okay
so
all you need is the right program to put
in so that's what computational
universality is
but then what's explanatory universality
well it's a layer on top of that it's
what we have
now we know how to write the program
that simulates how planets move around
the sun and so we've got good computer
simulations of that and we can predict
where you know jupiter is going to be in
the year 2060 let's say
and we can write programs to simulate
you know how an airplane flies hence we
have flight simulators
we can write programs that compose that
help us to compose music like garageband
and so on but what is the program
for a person
well it's got to be the thing
that
can explain anything
because that's what we can do that's
what
explanatory universality is the laws of
physics are comprehensible
we know that because of what i just said
about
computational universality
because
comprehensibility is a kind of
computation we understand stuff
and the laws of physics themselves are
computable
any physical system out there can be
captured by a computer program if only
you know what that computer program is
and so therefore effectively what people
are are virtual reality renderings of
their models of the world okay we are
minds running on brains and we are
modeling
the rest of
physical reality out there
you don't have direct access to physical
reality there's this
layer of interpretation between your
mind which is doing the thoughts
the evidence that is coming into your
senses and then physical reality you're
interpreting this evidence
and creating models the models are
inaccurate they can always be improved
but
you can explain anything
because
of what a mind is
as an explainer
postulating things that can't be
explained is all that one is doing at
that point and i know a lot of academics
do this i know a lot of intellectuals do
this a lot of science communicators do
this uh but what if the laws of physics
can't be understood what if there's a
thing out there that comes understood
well you're just saying god that's
really what we're saying
it's supernaturalism
now i credit supernaturalism to the work
of lilly tanner but lully told me that
in fact ayn rand used supernaturalism
as a term so
whatever the case as soon as you start
saying things are incomprehensible to
people you're postulating the existence
of a thing that is beyond nature that it
sits outside of
the laws of physics as we know them now
of course you can always say you can
always say what if the laws of physics
do turn out different what if we
overturn computational universality then
all bets are off sure but i would like
to think
for example
that whatever the
quantum gravity theory of computation is
uh we'll just see quantum computation as
it is now as a special case so we'll
still have this
universality okay it could rule out
explanatory universality
but
thinking about that now
all all that's doing it's just putting a
wall in front of progress
better to just presume computational
universality holds because if you don't
it's just postulating god there's an
entity out there or there's a thing out
there beyond the comprehension of people
okay fine
but it doesn't get you any further than
that it doesn't get you far whereas
assuming the opposite assuming
everything can be understood
does allow for progress in fact it's the
precondition
for progress okay so thanks adil great
question now i'm going to go to
all the very many twitter questions that
i got
and or at least try and get through some
let's see
beginning with david hearn
david says
is the number of harry potter universes
finite or aleph null
okay
harry potter universes firstly
harry potter universes
it's a term that arose in discussions
about the fabric of reality
like two decades ago or something like
that we were talking about
what the structure of the multiverse
implied
and
one suggestion was that
well in the multiverse there must be a
there must be universes in which there's
just series of coincidences happening
and these series of coincidences can
make things
like magic appear to work never actually
work
or appear to have worked
an example is
there is a universe
out there where every time a bespeckled
boy holds aloft a wooden stick and says
abracadabra
electrical sparks come flying out of the
stick
what do we make of that
we do not say
that the perspective boy holding the
stick aloft and saying abracadabra is
the cause
of the sparks coming out of the stick
it's just that by coincidence extremely
rare coincidence
sparks came out of the stick
and continue to come out of the stick
every time he says it and the number of
times
this happens in the multiverse
increasingly diminishes to a vanishingly
small number in fact it begins as a
vanishingly small number and it keeps
getting smaller and smaller smaller
approaching asymptotically approaching
zero the number of times that sort of
thing happens in the multiverse and this
is what we call a harry potter universe
technically such universes exist they're
not much worth worrying about
[Laughter]
because they as we say that
the structure of the universe is
determined by information flow and it's
only where knowledge is being generated
genuine knowledge that
things are replicated in such universes
you're not generating
knowledge
there's no such thing as real magic
and so in those universes every time
harry the harry potter every time this
bespeckled boy holds aloft the wand
and sparks come out the next time he
holds it aloft
it should behave exactly like it does in
our universe and does except again in a
very very tiny tiny sliver of universe
the tiny proportion of universes where
again the sparks come out
and repeat the process
okay so that's what a harry potter
universe is sounds bizarre and strange
but yeah
as david deutsch says i think in the
beginning of infinity um
somewhere in the multiverse all
fiction is fact
uh so long as it doesn't violate the
laws of physics it only doesn't violate
the laws of physics
um but again that's just due to
um well in many cases it can be due to
coincidence so they're
yeah okay
so that's what harry potter universes
are are they finite or aleph null oh um
i think neither
lf null is this
term
used to label
i think countable infinities countable
infinities but universes
can't be ordered
they're not countable they're
uncountable there's nowhere to start
counting them in the same way there's no
way to start counting
the real numbers you can count integers
right one two three four five six and
eight or ten
but real numbers the real number plane
so the set of all decimals
there's nowhere to start where do you
start zero point one
well no you can go smaller now zero
point 0.01 0.001 so
yeah the the real numbers the decimals
the fractions
uh there's no smallest one so you can't
count them so that's not
even though it's an infinity
it's not lf aleph null lf null or aleph
nought
is the size of infinity that the
integers occupy
but the real numbers is bigger than that
it's a 2 to the left null or something
like that
i'm not great on number theory um so
whatever it is it's bigger than lf no
and i think that uh in the case of harry
potter universe it's bigger
for the same reason that any subset of
universes is going to be uncannibly
infinite because our best theory
suggests that the number of universes
that existed at the beginning of time at
the big bang is the same as now it's
just that they have differentiated over
time there's always been
the the this number of uncountably
infinitely many universes it's just that
they all used to be absolutely perfectly
identical identical fungible at the
beginning of the universe and then began
to differentiate over time and continue
to differentiate over time but for any
slight of the multiverse any universe
any object within
the multiverse there are uncountably
infinitely many versions of it
many of which will be absolutely
the same
and then
you get variation as the universes
differentiate so
that gets technical
um
i like alfredo's little response to that
lf nail bottles of beer on the wall lf
nail bottles beer and we'll take one
down and pass it around aleph null
bottles of beer on the wall
yes sir you remove one
from from infinity and you've still got
infinity left it's one of those weird
things about infinity it's like um
you know
are there more even numbers
or are there more multiples of a billion
well most people would say well it's got
to be more even numbers there are
multiples of a billion but that's not
true
even for the integers because
for any even number
you can
be given a you can put in one to one
correspondence with a multiple of a
billion so two
um
a billion
four two billion and so on but for any
even number you can think of i can think
of a multiple of a billion so there are
the same number of multiples of a
billion as there are some number of
multiples of a billion as there are
multiples of a thousand
it's strange because there's infinite in
both cases
aleph null in fact in both cases
christian dean asks
a conclusion i've come to after
accepting deutsche's principle of
optimism is that i must cryogenically
freeze my body at death because the
problem of how to bring a frozen body
back to life must be soluble there are
no alternatives am i wrong
michael golding said no
i don't know i i don't know because i
don't know
um
well there's a whole bunch of questions
to ask you
what does i mean in that case
if you cryogenically freeze a body and a
brain
and what some neuroscience says at the
moment
that the our way of doing this at the
moment causes the
um water inside the cells to burst
through the walls of the cell destroying
the cells
so that
you know
this would be a kind of information loss
that the laws of thermodynamics would
have something to say about
and if that's the case then this is a
a problem that can't be solved because
there's a law of physics getting in the
way
the law of physics possibly being one of
the laws of thermodynamics saying well
you know the
information that was in the brain now
maybe he's lost but
maybe a version of you can come back
possibly not the same possibly you've
lost a whole bunch of memories possibly
you've lost some of your personality
so i don't know i don't think anyone
knows enough about
this thing that happens at death to
people
um
what happens
i don't know
um
would be better if we could somehow
rather uh map
to high fidelity all the connections in
the neurons
and store that in a computer somehow i
think that would be a preferable way of
doing things
before you know instead of cryogenically
freezing you know after all whatever's
going on in the brain is
is substrate independent right so what
we're interested in is preserving the
mind
so much the physical brain
so if we could preserve the mind by
copying the brain in some way to very
high fidelity you don't need to go about
freezing things you've got it on a disk
somewhere that is fun or robust but yeah
so i don't know but hey
as i say i don't know so if you're in a
position where you can cryogenically
freeze yourself
and you can't avoid death
okay that'll be my first plan
avoid death in the first place so you
have to worry about cryogenically
freezing yourself
but if you are in a position to cry
gently freeze yourself at death yeah why
not why not take yeah absolutely yeah if
you've got the money like i think walt
disney or whoever
absolutely yeah
i don't as i say i don't know and so
therefore in that situation
take a bet take a punt and and then
freeze yourself
josh
is next
how should we think about the moral
institutional and political questions of
when to act on a new theory
if stakes are high
how to find the right level of testing
criticism and corroboration before
trying something that could cause or
prevent huge misery existential risk
it goes on to say bayesian epistemology
and precautionary principle both reports
offer answers which may partly explain
their success how can we find better
answers
okay how should we think about the moral
political questions of when to act on a
new theory if stakes are high how to
find the right level of testing
criticism and corroboration that way of
framing things
is justificationist it's saying that
you've got this theory
but
only if you've achieved a certain amount
of testing or criticism or corroboration
are you then kind of
justified in using the theory but this
is the wrong way to think about things
if you have a problem then presumably
the theory is there as a solution to
your problem and the theory will be an
explanation that will be good or it
won't be good
so the question is not
when to act on a theory it's if you have
a problem do you have a solution in
which case
implement the solution and if you don't
have a solution
continue to be creative to come up with
one
before trying something that could cause
or prevent huge misery well yeah we'd
need a specific example okay that
it sounds
like yes this is
the
intellectuals concern
ai you know the ai apocalypse is coming
should we
um
how should we think about ai given moral
institutional political question when to
act on a theory of ai let's say is that
that's kind of what might be hinting at
here
but ai solves a problem
now
yeah so i i have talked about this in
that in fact the last live stream and
various other places
at the risk of boring listeners um
i i tend not to think in terms of so
much
the risks of any given solution
the risks of any given piece of
technology
but rather the rate of progress is more
important
i call the master problem
the slowing of progress
so anyone who holds up a particular
piece of technology or a particular
solution and says of that thing this
thing's going to be the end of us
therefore we've got to slow down
knowledge creation into this thing
because it's going to be the black ball
as bostrom would call it that's going to
wipe out humanity
anytime someone does that what they're
saying is slow down progress
slow down people
uh we're creating knowledge too fast
we're solving problems at a rapid rate
i can't keep up something like that
but i would say no no
of course we don't want people to use
technology in bad ways but we need the
technology first in order to solve
problems that knowledge is as people
have said before power and power can be
used for good or evil
i am
very reluctant um
to hand over
decision making about the use of any
technology
to
moral
um and or moral institutions let's say
like uh
churches political institutions like
governments because they're just made of
people
and so i think there needs to be a
diversity of approaches and if someone
doesn't want a particular technology
like ai well then they can have an
island that rules out ai let's say but
for the rest of us who think that ai is
bringing
many many benefits does it come with
hazards sure
so does
the ubiquitous spreading of food around
the world so does the internet so does
name your thing cars come with car
accidents
of course
we're told by intellectuals that ai is a
special case haven't we been told that
in the past about everything
it's that pessimists archive on twitter
that you know
comes up with old news stories saying
about how you know
name your technology of the past and
there was an intellectual saying this is
going to be the end of civilization
and so we're at the point now where ai
is the thing that's going to be the end
of civilization so yeah we don't need to
go
and have a particular level of testing
criticism and corroboration instead we
need to think in terms of problems and
their solutions
what problem is being solved
is it a good solution what problems are
being created
okay yeah
but
but has asked what's the difference
between reason and rationality
i don't think there's a strict
accepted definition
uh distinction to be made the way i tend
to use the words
is reason is just an umbrella term for
absolutely
every
subject that aims at
trying to understand reality
so science is a special case of reason
it has special tools within it that
allow us to understand the physical
world but history
is a case of reason as well
where we're using special tools to try
and understand what happened in the past
morality is a form of reason
a way in which we can use reason but
also it is uh part of reason
at its best and you know things that
aren't moral are
not using reason unreasonable let's say
rationality is that word i would use to
describe error correcting and so it is a
tool of reason it's one of the tools of
reason
so that's the way that's the now other
people may have different ones you could
obviously use them as synonyms in a
sense you know you could say someone is
reasonable someone is rational similar
kind of senses but yeah rationality
seems to me to be more focused on if
someone's being rational they're focused
on
correcting errors
identifying correcting errors
um
and so but a person is being
anti-rational
uh or irrational let's say is not
focused on correcting errors
isn't isn't concerned about the errors
anti-rational is actively entrenching
errors in some way so it's about errors
that's why rationality's about errors
and reason is a broader than that
the the generation perhaps of good
explanations might be what reason is
more more about so it includes things
like creativity
and so on
john
mandelbauer
has asked
why is there anything we measure that
confirms that angular momentum is not
conserved but we choose to believe it is
conserved and not just measure anything
i don't understand that question i'm
afraid john
confirms that angular momentum is not
conserved
and your momentum is conserved so i
don't understand that um i
have to ask john or follow his link
which i'm not going to do now
unfortunately
path seeker has asked
what should one study after quantum
mechanics
[Music]
i don't think there's an answer to that
question either
there's certainly not a universal answer
to that question you know one might
study quantum mechanics and find out it
was terribly boring in which case the
answer is you know who knows what your
interests are
um you know
so the answer could be poetry or
gymnastics um
but i guess if you're asking you're a
physicist and you you know you've
studied quantum mechanics what should
you do next well again that would be up
to you um i don't
know
um but if you're
yeah there's no there's not much point
giving you a study schedule because
by the time anyone
finishes completing quantum mechanics
they all know way way way way more
than any possible advisor of theirs
would know about what they want to do
next
if you're asking today in 2022
should i study quantum mechanics and i
say well you're interested in and you
say yes i said well okay yes what should
i do after that well you'll know
after
after six months after two weeks of
studying quantum mechanics you might
know that you don't like it or you do
like it but you really only like this
stuff like we're talking about before
the the different
genres i suppose of quantum mechanics
maybe you're more interested in the
philosophical stuff maybe you're more
interested in quantum computation
it's a broad broad field maybe you're
interested in the experimental stuff
more than the theoretical stuff
yeah so again not a universal answer to
that what do we say problems are
parochial and so if you have a
particular interest in something like
quantum mechanics that's because you
have a problem of what to
how to stimulate your curiosity and
quantum mechanics seems to be scratching
that itch for you
so
yeah but that's your problem
not my problem and so therefore i can't
advise you what you should study after
because you will have a different
problem you'll be in a different problem
situation
uh
denisovich has asked historically
dynamic societies have emerged when
there was a tradition of criticism
but what exactly allows for such a
tradition of criticism to emerge in the
first place
so dynamic societies are
those ones that are where a tradition of
criticism dominates yes
what allows for the tradition of
criticism to emerge in the first place
i don't think we know we don't have a
good history of optimism
one guess would be a simple rejection of
dogma and authority okay we begin there
it might not be a general tradition of
criticism but it might be a rejection of
things like
dogma you know people beginning to say
these ancient texts don't have all the
answers
can we not just adhere to what the text
says the holy book doesn't have all the
answers and that could begin that might
not begin i might not bring on a wave of
an entire tradition of criticism but it
could get the ball rolling so to speak
rejecting
authorities as they're understood maybe
rejecting the kings
implementing a way of replacing leaders
democracy okay like
the ancient greeks had a version of
democracy of replacing the rulers
over time
and eventually i guess enough of these
little stones fall and then you have the
avalanche of a tradition of criticism
where then everything is opened up for
uh
for criticism for improvement for
progress
and then you have the the panopticon way
of dealing with problems so you don't
just consult authorities and dogmas
instead they rely on individuals to deal
with their problems and
experts to be advisers uh but
you know we're two steps forward one
step back sometimes you know recently
maybe the experts have become an expert
class
and instead of
them providing us with
kind wisdom
and advice
couched in fallibless terms
maybe they're coming to us
more as authorities
again
which is not good
so we have to guard against that
any threat to a tradition of criticism
where some people are
in some people's words are held immune
from criticism because
they're experts let's say you can't defy
expert advice
let's say would be
uh and uh antithetical to a tradition of
criticism but what allows for it to
emerge in the first place i would just i
don't know and the history would have to
be written of this but i i guess it has
to start somewhere with someone
questioning something and others
agreeing and it could be things like
you know questioning received wisdom
doctrines dogmas and
the authorities in a society
triple dollar sign asks
what does it exactly mean for a guest to
survive
criticism error correction because for
example newton's theory of gravity has
been falsified but it's still knowledge
in other words when can our theory be
considered to have survived criticism
yeah so
knowledge
doesn't mean
you have to survive criticism you might
very well have been refuted but it still
counts as knowledge why
because one way of explaining what
knowledge is not the only way one way is
it's information that solves a problem
okay so knowledge is information that
solves a problem it might be false the
explanation might be false it's no
longer a good explanation but it solves
the problem
for
what you're interested in
you want to get your rocket to the moon
you can use newton's
theory of gravity though it's been
falsified technically falsified
it allows you to make
sufficiently good predictions to do the
job it solves the problem you're
interested in it still counts as
knowledge
when can a theory be considered to have
survived criticism well just in those
cases where it's not refuted
by
criticism by the charge that it's a bad
explanation
or by experimental refutation
um
and so
yeah what does it mean exactly yeah i
can't it's one of those things where i
guess wittgenstein would say
you know my spade is turned
in other words i don't know how to
further break down what does it mean for
something to survive criticism
it just means that all
attempts or creative attempts by people
to shoot this thing down have failed
that doesn't mean it will continue
to be in that position of um being
unable to be criticized in fact we
should expect all of our knowledge to
eventually um be successfully criticized
in some way shape or form and thereby
improved
taras
asks what do you think makes a good meme
resonate with other humans and spread
across
widely
so
i don't think a meme to spread
needs necessarily to resonate with other
humans
and the reason for that is because
many memes
uh
inexplicit that's one thing we can't
actually articulate out loud what they
are
and also are not good for us so they're
not resonating for us
as such whatever resonates resonate
sounds like it's got this
oh hold on tatus has said what do you
think makes a good meme resonate with
other humans okay apologies so a bad
meme is of course something
anti-rational but tatus hasn't asked
that so that's what makes a good meme
resonate with other humans
when it's well it just comes back to
knowledge a meme is a kind of idea that
gets replicated uh because people
um
are able to
copy the behavior
of others and you know whether that's
their words or you know
whatever it happens to be the meme the
meme propagates by being copied into the
minds of other people
why would a good meme
resonate when it solves problems for
people when it solves problems for
people
memes ideas knowledge okay a lot of
unders understanding this stuff it all
comes under that uh same umbrella i
think i've used the word umbrella three
times now um so
yeah if if the meme is useful
um if it solves a problem
then it's going to resonate with other
humans
and the solving the problem doesn't have
to be like well
you know
solving some engineering problem or
something like it can be solving the
problem of what's fun what makes you
laugh okay
i feel like having a laugh you know like
well that jokes will get spread and you
know the literal internet memes will
spread because they're solving the
problem of entertaining people who are
otherwise bored
so yeah when it solves a problem i would
say is the the main thing
like
is next
he asks not sure if i can frame this
idea into a proper question but i was
wondering according to our current
knowledge our timeline goes like there
was a big bang galaxies solar system
stars and planets formed conditions
permitted so life arose on earth and
finally evolution
basically through trial and error made
us who
who we are so based on this i think we
could say that we are here by chance and
because conditions permitted and not by
design now let's assume that there
exists a multiverse so if i'm not wrong
that could mean that there exists a very
large number possibly close to infinity
of earth's like ours but with slight
variations in each one so finally my
question was doesn't this sound more
plausible if say we're actually in a
simulation grand experiment of some sort
in which the underlying code basically
instructs to form x number of variations
of the universe with slight variations
in h1 if we assume that a multiverse
exists doesn't it basically imply that
all of it is by design and not by chance
as just a question floating around in my
mind i understand the logic behind my
question because you thought
um
so
what i would say is
all your
all that says
is
the multiverse is true quantum theory
and everything we understand is true
but on to that we're going to graft
we're going to add this assumption
that it all exists inside of a computer
rather than just going with realism okay
realism is the claim
that
well
science is giving us
um the correct knowledge true knowledge
some true knowledge about reality
approximately true knowledge about
reality
but if it's all a simulation then
knowledge
the process of knowledge creation isn't
giving us true knowledge about reality
but rather what's going on inside the
simulation reality is outside of the
simulation
now if you listen to
my last podcast
about the fabric of reality
or indeed you read i think it's chapter
six
universality and the limits of
computation from the fabric of reality
david explains there
that
if you were in a simulation then
unless the simulation was able to
um
uh
sort of uh simulate to the level of
fidelity reality
then the people inside the simulation
would eventually find out
that strings were being pulled in some
way shape or form
that there was an external reality
they'd be able to do experiments in
order to find out that
that at least something was outside of
the universe because that's what people
do okay we're universal explainers we're
going to encounter a problem for which
the only way of solving it
requires us to refer to a reality
outside of the reality we inhabit so
this is a kind of a refutation of that
solidistic view which related to
solipsism right
so
i no i'm not going to go with you
to where it says doesn't that basically
imply it is all by design no not at all
i mean you're just adding on
[Music]
your feeling is
you said it sounds more plausible if
we're actually seeing like it doesn't
sound plausible to me at all
doesn't it at all it sounds more
plausible to me that we're not in a
simulation because the simulation just
like we're dreaming at all is just an
assumption on top of
realism is true
you know reality exists
it consists of everything that actually
does exist
um
science is giving us some knowledge
about that reality
we're not in a simulation
but
if we are in a if you're going to push
the argument that we are in a simulation
you're basically saying you agree with
realism that science works as it would
normally would but we're just going to
add on the extra assumption the extra
axiom that's it's all in a simulation
and you know occam's razor i suppose if
we want to refer to that you know um all
else being equal just
eliminate the unnecessary assumptions it
doesn't add anything it actually
detracts from what we know of reality
um
yeah
so i think that in denisovich
again
what do you think of the claims that
people are born with certain traits such
as being compassionate hard working and
creative
uh okay or that some people are born
capable of excelling at algebra or
speaking french are these good
explanations or simply bad explanations
there's a sense in which i can answer
yes and no to this okay
people are born with
the capacity to do anything and that
includes being compassionate hard
working creative do we have inborn ideas
yes i think we do
what those are i don't think we have
much of a clue about
but yeah we must be born with some
ideas we're not born as blank slates but
those ideas that we're born with are
themselves changeable this is the third
way i keep speaking about there's this
great debate that goes on are we born
with blank slates
or are we born with ideas and therefore
are our ideas genetically determined in
some way and they just determine our
behavior well these are not the only two
options we have
we could be born with ideas that can be
changed by what by us people who are
universal explainers and a universal
explainer can be compassionate hard
working and creative certainly creative
i think everyone's born being creative
i was listening to joe rogan interview
mark andreasen today
latest podcast and
joe was you know pushing back against
mark mark was saying everyone's creative
very optimistic saying very optimistic
things you know he's in his experience
you know people are creative and in my
experience too but joe said no i can
introduce you to some people who aren't
that's incorrect okay
what what counts as creativity
it's a low bar right a lot of people
aren't using their creativity for
composing music and theories of
cosmology and
poetry and all that sort of stuff so
you know to some observers they would
say that person isn't creative i think
that's just wrong
people can be creative
raising a family
you know
laying tar on the road people can be
creative in
any
area of
life
human life
even in there's not like david deutsch
says in the beginning of infinity you
know there's this idea that you know um
invention is you know one percent
inspiration 99 perspiration but even the
perspiration phases for a human being
are creative people can think of new and
better ways to automate or make easier
those perspiration phases
we're not
like artificial intelligence
we're not like robots we we are able to
be creative at every step
of any process in any
time we problem solve and so on and so
forth so yeah people are definitely born
creative but they can use that
creativity to be compassionate or not be
compassionate be hard working or not not
hard working whether they're born
compassionate or not is is another thing
you know this
hobbesian view
that perhaps
people are born just bad
and it's very hard to teach them not to
be bad
they're born not compassionate and hard
to teach them to be compassionate i
disagree with that
but that's a whole other
discussion
some people are born capable of
excelling in algebra or speaking
everyone's born capable of excelling at
algebra or speaking french everyone
it's just that i would say very early on
in our life
we have experiences
when i say very early on i mean perhaps
before just before birth
perhaps just after birth that can shape
what we're interested in
some of us are drawn more towards colors
because we're shown bright colors some
of us are drawn more towards
feeling
solid versus liquid
investigating the world in uh different
ways very early on which can shape what
as adults we go on to be interested in
some might be very very interested in
you know
mummy and daddy writing stuff
that text stuff looks interesting of
course they're not thinking that in
words
some might be interested in looking
outside
at the sky yeah these things very early
on
you know perhaps weeks can can
definitely i would say shape
the mind of a person and therefore
cause them to either go down the road of
excelling at let's say languages or
excelling at mathematics or excelling at
building stuff or excelling who knows
whatever the thing is
yeah but i would not say that people are
born inherently incapable of anything
and even if you do have these
experiences early on that shape what you
do
look at that mathematician who won the
fields medal that the story that went
around about he
felt he didn't like mathematics he
became a poet for a while it wasn't
until late an undergraduate or something
like that at university he realized he
did like doing mathematics and became
one of the greatest mathematicians of
all time
was he born
incapable of doing mathematics clearly
not but many many people would look at
his story perhaps the first
i don't know
15 years of his life and if they had
have met him at 15 they would have said
you've got no hope of being a
mathematician stick to your poetry
because he didn't show any interest in
mathematics so therefore you probably
didn't do particularly who knows i don't
know exactly how well he did in tests
but i know there are situations like
that brian cox talks about you know the
science communicator physicist particle
physicist
who says that he got
a d on his was it a levels in
mathematics
and i think you know the grades are a b
c d
he is a fail or something so he just
passed
proof positive you can be
a great physicist
science communicator
mathematically very very literate
competent
lecturing people in undergraduate
physics
and yet barely pass your year 12
mathematics exam great example wonderful
example there are many such examples of
this faraday apparently couldn't do
maths very well
so
all that says
is that people can pick up certain
things later on in life and if you think
you are incapable of mattering capable
of languages are incapable of something
there's just a block there it's not that
genetically you're not wired for it it's
that you don't care enough you're not
interested enough but if you had the
problem
that required the interest then you
would
you would clearly brian cox didn't have
the problem at the time when he left
year 12 at school of needing to do maths
really well but later on he figured out
hey i like this physics stuff now i've
got a problem because this physics stuff
is written in the language of
mathematics i better learn
mathematics to a more common level and
then he probably found that he actually
enjoyed it i know that was my experience
i've had that experience many times so
there's certain courses forced to do at
university for the sake of getting the
degree
in physics and not
liking
and then choosing other areas of
mathematics and finding out hey i
actually like this area of mathematics
this is fun to do you know specifically
the stuff on like logic and computation
uh i liked i like i loved doing that
sort of stuff it was really interesting
i wanted to understand things like
girdles incompleteness theorem i wanted
to understand how to program a turing
machine so that then made math really
interesting to me a lot of the other
stuff not so much
okay um
partial differential equations take it
or leave it
a lot of the stuff in classical
mechanics newtonian mechanics the the
heavy mathematics that you're required
to learn in order to do some of these
really complicated stuff in newtonian
mechanics really complicated stuff
uh gives people nightmares
that's really hard
and surprisingly now you can go into
quantum computation and the mathematics
is not hard
and yet in new journey mechanics it can
be hard it just depends on
what you're interested in yeah okay
um
so i don't think people are born with
certain traits
alex alex
gierev
has asked if creativity consists
of variation of existing ideas what is
your opinion on using spaced repetition
software to enhance creativity by
preventing forgetting
and thereby accumulating a larger pool
of ideas which can be adapted as
solutions for new problems
no doubt it works for some people
something like that
um
enhancing creativity i mean there's just
there's been so much work done on this
and i don't think there's a universal
answer
some people work really fast
some people work really slow some people
work all day some people work in short
bursts
you know the vial has that thing of
saying work um
like a lion not like uh i don't know
what's the other thing
the thing that sort of works all day you
know a lion you know
sleeps under the shade most of the day
and then
does the thing that it wants to do you
know it goes and chases the antelope
work like that especially as a creative
person perhaps
i know i tend to find that i like that
method
um
but there are other people who are very
creative who are obviously following a
much more rigorous schedule and that
works for them so i don't think that but
if something works for you and you're
you feel like
you know i can feel like this you know
the creativity is just not coming that
particular day for whatever reason yeah
doing something different absolutely can
help absolutely is the thing to do
rather than just focusing on
trying to allow the creativity to come
sometimes it doesn't and so yeah just
changing your mind and changing your
um your place
any number of these things can certainly
help
so space repetition software yeah okay
try that sure
hamza has asked can you elaborate on
deutsche's view on iq and understand
that questions exist everywhere but iq
seems to be a strong indicator of
success
some communities seem to produce more
stellar thinkers within stem what is the
explanation for this surely it cannot
just be interest
can you elaborate on deutsche's view of
iq no i don't i can't i don't i don't
speak for david so i don't know
what his view of iq is so i'll give you
what my view is
um
i understand that correlations exist
everywhere but like iq is a strong
indicator of success yes i agree
with the people who say
people who score high on iq tests tend
to be successful in society there's no
argument with that
the argument is
is i
q our iq test measures of intelligence
or measures of creativity these are
different things
even if the iq tests are the results are
consistent over time and predict a
predictive of success in society
you fit into society great
you can climb the corporate ladder great
you can be an engineer great
all of that just means a certain kind of
knowledge that iq tests are measuring
how well a person fits into society
now if you want to call that kind of
knowledge intelligence fine but then
there's something deeper about people
call it universal explaining call it
creativity which is much deeper
now i happen to think that you know if
we're going to properly use the word
intelligence then what we mean is
creativity
and i don't think there are differences
between people there's differences
between people
as popper said in the little bits of
knowledge they have
but we are all infinitely ignorant
you know
famous stories of mathematicians and
physicists who
did brilliant work
but unfortunately also lived up to the
stereotype of being a little bit crazy
girdle is one
so
why because
although these people have
great amounts of knowledge and
proficiency in certain areas and can
even think quickly in certain areas they
can be deficient heavily deficient in
other areas
does that mean they're not intelligent
or they are intelligent
does girdle's mathematics make him
intelligent
but his constant paranoia make him
unintelligent
i don't think it's the right question i
think that intelligence should just be a
qualitative measure of whether or not
someone is whether or not a system is
capable of creating new explanations
if that's the definition
of intelligence and it should be if for
something like seti the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence what we're
really searching for there is people
we're searching for entities that are
universal explainers like us
i think that's a good definition of
intelligence in which case there's not a
sliding grayscale it's black or white
either they can do it or they can't do
it
animals other animals on planet earth
can't generate explanations they can't
be creative in the way that we can we
people are unique on the face of this
planet
we can all create explanations and i'm
not just talking about the successor to
the successor of the unification of
quantum theory and general relativity
that's not what explanations are
only
they also include explanations about
what do you think is the best thing for
you to cook for dinner tonight you have
an explanation for that
what is the explanation for how you get
to work each day there's an explanation
for that you're generating explanations
constantly you can turn this creative
capacity of yours onto anything that's
what intelligence is
there's not a great scale of it either
you can do it or you can't now can some
people come up with better explanations
than others it depends upon the
particular area they're interested in
but as a general measure
okay
you either are able to do that thing or
you can't do that thing so i don't buy
into iq for that reason
okay i think it's a silly way of
talking about people
reducing people to a number i think it's
immoral
besides everything else
aside from useless
i think if if you've got a job and
you're offering it to people
either the candidate is a
good friendly reliable
gregarious person
willing to learn perhaps has some
background knowledge that you require or
they don't this whole idea that iq tests
are in some way
useful
in trying to assess employees
ridiculous
you're never going to have two people
who are exactly equal and you're going
to have to split them based on iq
you know another way of looking at iq is
this person
is
scoring high on the iq test because
they've practiced lots of iq style
questions
and maybe the iq test also measures for
conformity but maybe you don't want
conformity
maybe you want someone who thinks
outside the box
and so
can second guess the iq test and thinks
beyond what the iq test
creators the creators of the test
thought
these tests are made up by psychologists
among others
can you think like a psychologist
what do you think the best answer is so
yeah i don't
you can rank order people based on
maths tests on history tests on iq tests
name whatever the
test happens to be
and you will get a rank order of people
but it doesn't really point anything
truly deep about a person it points to a
specific kind of knowledge that they
have that's all
mathematics tests point to mathematical
knowledge iq tests point to supposedly a
broad range of knowledge
and might be predictive of certain
things lots of things are predictive
it's also predictive if you're
brought up in a certain kind of
household as well but are you going to
employ someone on the basis of that
okay yeah
anakit
has asked read any good fiction lately
uh
these i'm getting to the age now where i
used to read a lot of fiction
i'm going to the age now where i don't
know more nostalgic and i read i reread
things more often than i read new things
when it comes to fiction when i need
time off from reading all the other
non-fiction stuff that i'm doing
so yeah
i read lore of the rings now and again
um sort of every couple of years i read
um uh re-read that
christopher lee who played saruman in
the lord of the rings said he would read
lord of the rings once a year
because
i find him transported to the world
talk about running virtual reality
renderings of places that tolkien
with language was is able to do that has
been able to do that so reid i love
reading tolkien's works
um you know
a drizzly gray day with lord of the
rings
um sitting by a heater looking out the
window fantastic
but i read star wars star wars extended
universe stuff
the godfather the godfather series is
fantastic hannibal oh the the science of
lambs book
so i yeah i've re-read those recently
and in terms of
new
fiction nothing new recently
i
not a huge science fiction fan i do read
some as i say star wars extended
universe but the thing i like about star
wars is very much within the fantasy
genre
they don't care about the laws of
physics
even with hard science fiction i always
find difficulty with
when they start breaking the laws of
physics
sometimes they don't but when they do i
just think
how does this really work okay but
there's
as david points out in one of the books
um
there is objectively better and worse
science fiction and fiction
generally um if you're but you know
you can call yourself science fiction
but you're not star wars is the perfect
example in fact i would say star trek
is is fantasy not science fiction
um
[Music]
because
you know
saying that
the way in which you troll beyond the
speed of light requires gravity dampers
but you never actually explain how the
gravity dampers work it's fantasy you're
in a world of fantasy not a world of um
science fiction as such because science
fiction i would say is well here are the
laws specifically there are some people
to do that i think greg egan does that
um
adil has asked bret do mentally gifted
challenged children oh their
proclivities to differences in hardware
processing speed memory input output are
the differences in software
different interests and why
firstly i don't know
um would be the first answer
there would
have to be differences between people in
terms of the hardware yes
i think that the hardware can be you
know this whole thing of neuroplasticity
is i think speaking to the fact that we
can change our hardware
we can change our hardware in some way
we can change the speed and we can
change the memory people can be taught
how to be
brilliant with their memory you know you
see these which youtube things of people
being able to
recite you know pie to a certain number
of thousand decimal places or something
or other or just have really good memory
be given a list of 60 items random items
and then be able to recite them back
immediately
and i've seen you know people talk about
how they used to have a terrible memory
and then they used these techniques and
they became good at memory so you can
train your memory now memory is
hardware
so there must be a way of
growing that part of the brain just by
repetition
and so the hardware can respond to what
the software is doing this is why
a human being is so
unusual and strange in terms of
they definitely
obey the laws of physics and so
therefore conform to computational
universality but that's not to say we're
like
any other computer in existence we're
not
you know any other computer
can't make choices can't be creative
doesn't have free will whatever however
you want to put that isn't conscious as
far as we know
um
but it might very well be the case i
don't know i'm not a neuroscientist but
i don't think any neuroscientist knows
this yet
that we can actively grow parts of the
brain obviously unconsciously
and
so
differences in hardware
memory software i think that could
explain
some
i think that the people who are labeled
as
challenged let's say may have very short
memories
that could potentially be developed but
maybe aren't over time for whatever
reason
maybe their clock speed or effective
clock speed of regions of brain is
slower
maybe
maybe that could be changed over time as
well maybe not
so maybe some people are limited in that
way
not to say limited income in in
explanatory universality they still
in principle could
understand anything that's
understandable
but
likely won't show interest in it
because they'll get bored very easily
and so boredom and interest might very
well have you know there might be uh
something to do also with you know how
fast the neurons are firing which is a
matter of hardware
but in principle they could you know pay
attention for long enough and understand
the thing
so i don't know um
but i think that when it comes to gifted
people certainly i think that early on
they gain
crucial knowledge and they gain crucial
knowledge therefore gain so background
knowledge especially in things like
mathematics
they understand things
at a very young age perhaps as toddlers
that many of us don't understand until
we're
teens or later
and so therefore they've got this
massive head start now it's precisely
what those things are we don't know
because so much knowledge is inexplicit
and because it's inexplicit that means
it's
very very difficult to teach
by virtue of the fact you can't tell
someone
how to do the thing
it's inexplicit
and so
but but children are
faster learners not because their brains
are faster there's a related topic
but rather because they're unencumbered
by anti-rational means
this is my idea anyway
well i don't know if it originates with
me but this is the one this is what
when people ask me about but you know
children learn so much faster they learn
language faster and so on they can learn
anything faster they show interest and
curiosity and everything why can't we
keep that up as adults because we learn
things that actively cause us to slow
down our learning what great irony and
unfortunate that we pick up this baggage
along the way
from
schooling
teaching
uh
from
other adults in life
perhaps even just other kids that we
grow up with as well
we're made to feel bad about learning
over time and so we become worse
learners over time
we we gain anti-rational means
antirational means
these things that withhold themselves
cause us to withhold things from
criticism
as a kid we don't care we're
we've got
in some sense no shame no fear no
embarrassment
or very minimum
amounts of that and as we get older
we do have fear
we get shame and embarrassment
and so we're less likely to try as hard
and persistently for as long for fear
that we're going to appear stupid
let's say is one example you know i have
this i often talk about my
inability to learn languages and i know
it's a software issue i know precisely
what the issue is i get embarrassed in
trying and then i get bored
because i can't make the sounds that
need to be made
and i try and try and i get it wrong and
the more i try the sillier i sound i
just think i give up
tired of making myself sound stupid and
that's that's i know what the problem is
and i know i could just try harder and
all that sort of stuff but yeah i think
this is the kind of thing this is the
kind of thing that slows people down
from learning okay
learning what bores you
children don't know what bores them yet
they haven't figured it out yet
everything's exciting but eventually you
know you're just by virtue of the fact
that there's only so many hours in the
day
you rule certain things out they're
really interested in this thing less
interested in this thing and the thing
that is slightly less interesting
becomes increasingly less interesting
over time as other people tend to
develop those skills and you don't you
tend to preserve the interest in the
thing that you are best at and excel at
and perhaps
is more rare in your social circle let's
say
among other things okay so i'm just
going to
scroll back up through the
chat here because i've
not paid attention apart from to adil's
questions
um
uh john julius gemora asked about an
hour ago now more than an hour
complete noob here i just want to use
math effectively on
day to day scenarios where do i start
any book recommendations
no
although i taught maths for a long time
um
no i think there are much better people
to ask
than myself
for that
it depends on what area of matter such a
broad area like you're just talking
being able to do mental arithmetic
um
yeah
that's that arthur benjamin guy arthur
benjamin the
mathemagician he calls himself look him
up on youtube he's done ted talks
fantastic amazing he's got a course out
there for how to do
mental arithmetic better you know he'd
be a
much better person to
consult about something like that just
pick up his course but otherwise you
know
math on a day-to-day
scenarios again what is your day-to-day
scenario are you working in home loans
let's say in which case how to figure
out percentages and
decimals and stuff
yes i don't think there's a simple
answer to that any book recommendations
for all the
terribleness of the school system the
textbooks are usually quite good right
so if you are an adult who feels like
you want to know maths i'd pick up a
school high school textbook absolutely
they've written
that and it's been
there are better and worse ones of
course
but
by virtue of the fact that the
the textbooks have been through this
filter
of kids either saying this is a good
textbook there's a bad textbook
textbooks today are so much better than
they were in the past and they continue
to get better over time i mean they
could be better still but you know what
i mean
one of the few areas of schooling that
shows objective improvements over time
science texts
mathematics with some steps back you
know as i say two steps forward one step
back now and again you know
there is um
uh politics being injected into certain
textbooks now but that aside broadly
speaking
if you want to learn
any of the sciences you want to learn
mathematics then
these areas
then yeah school textbooks um
would be a way to go
um
thing
spell solo how to be wealthy um i
don't know that's a question for naval
ravicon didn't he's written
uh well his book
naval's almanac
um or his
podcasts or the
twitter thread how to be rich i would go
to that i'm not i am no authority on
that
i hand that over to someone else um
if the ball guy has asked what are your
current thoughts on cryptocurrency are
the ups and
downs simply the normal behavior of any
system going through evolution yeah
it's here to stay it's here it's here to
stay in the same way that computers are
here to say stay and naysayers
uh the same you know we will always get
naysayers with new technology
it's proven itself now crypto has proven
itself there is a
critical mass of people
sufficient numbers are out there now
that yeah there's been a downturn but
there's been a downturn across the
financial markets
thanks to poor policy decisions so
everything's turned down but crypto's
one of those things but it's not going
anywhere it's not going anywhere
sure some of the coins the the crappy
coins are gonna go coins
but
the
the generally speaking you know bitcoin
and i'd say ethereum are absolutely here
to stay blockchain technology is here to
stay
people want currencies that allow them
to escape nevada says allow them to
escape from the fed allow them to escape
from
authorities that can intervene in
transactions
instead we have peer-to-peer financial
transactions possible now with this
thing that no one else has to know about
you know
so
this is the way things are going
increasingly
sure in reaction governments of the
world authorities of the world are
reacting
but there is this great struggle now
between authoritarianism and
libertarianism
the libertarians aren't going anywhere
they might have suffered defeats here
and there
but they're not gonna
approach zero asymptotically
in the long run i think it's the only
way to go is individualism
that means things like crypto so yeah
crypto is just
the ups and downs are yes the normal
behavior of any new system yes going
through evolution but it's absolutely
here
to stay
not because it's a get rich quick scheme
or anything like that but because it's a
way
of storing value
independent of
existing mechanisms
where
especially
third parties can intervene in
particular governments that's what some
of us
like about this thing anyway
that's the main reason for it
that's the main reason for it okay now
every way of storing value has problems
okay you can store value in gold you can
store value in a house you can store
value in
goods and whatever
they all have liabilities
crypto has liabilities but it's it's
it's a method of storing value that's
all a big you know sort of big deal in a
sense but um revolutionary in the other
sense that is
it's far more
on the side of individuals
and creativity and independence and
anti-authority and liberty and so on all
that stuff
yeah
jonathan hirsch is there anything
deutsch has wrong he seems spot on with
nearly everything he says i agree you
know i think i had this question last
time
my response was
i think
david deutsch he likes a cup of tea
but
he likes tea bags
i don't know if i'm speaking at a school
and saying that but i like the leaves
i think he's objectively wrong if he
doesn't like loose leaf tea over tea
bags but that would be a question for
him
i think he's objectively wrong on that
yeah no but in terms of the serious
point um
well this is why i
promote
the ideas
and why i think it's important to do so
is that
i wouldn't do it if
david deutsch was super super well known
if he had
you know 50 million twitter followers
this was probably a lower bound on what
he should have
then i wouldn't need to do what i do
but because
his work is relatively unknown it's well
known by some physicists who work in the
area
it's well known by people in a certain
community
but broadly speaking it's not as well
known
it's
and
it is the philosophy of optimism
his work
the philosophy of progress
incremental progress um error correction
knowledge creation solving of problems
all of that
why it hasn't received the traction it
has i don't know
some of the ideas are subtle
but the more people that can be out
there approaching the
the countering as i like to say the
countering of the dominant culture which
is a pessimistic culture
the better
but within the people that counter
pessimistic culture in a rational way
okay so you've got the intellectual
class i suppose
the dominant strand of the intellectual
class are
far and away pessimists right
and so you've got this small number of
people who are optimists and pushing
back against the pessimists but they're
small in number it's probably like a one
to five ratio or something like that
when it comes to intellectual life i
mean just look at
pick a podcast not mine
pick a pick a typical podcast that
interviews people
and then look at the list of
intellectuals that you have on and
listen
you know add up how many pessimist
versus optimus how many people are
saying
all the ways in which civilization is
going to hell in a handbasket
all the people who are saying here's all
the ways we're going to die from alien
invasion or ai apocalypse or climate
change catastrophe or
genetic
accident virus
whatever
now compare those people to
the optimus okay i think it's like a one
to four one to five ratio something like
that but within that
group of people who push back
an even tinier percentage of those
are aware of david deutch
or insofar as they're aware they're not
really
all in
on
the world view as we call it
there are optimists out there but to
take um
people who are very closely allied
stephen pinker okay
great optimist but there is pessimistic
stuff in his work you know
the very next podcast which should come
out
tomorrow i think is about the next
chapter of his
book i think it's chapter five
subtitle bayesian reasoning
and it's that kind of reasoning that
leads to
people becoming prophets thinking they
can prophesy and therefore they tend
towards pessimism so the intellectuals
their dominant epistemology is one which
naturally gravitates towards prophecy
which itself naturally gravitates
towards pessimism
so this is the problem we have
in intellectual circles and so yeah
the the the community of people
promoting the work of david delish
occupies this tiny tiny sliver
of
optimus generally speaking
which itself is a very minority view
amongst
all intellectual movements that exist
and that have any kind of influence on
things like politics and things like
culture at the moment
far and away we are dominated by
pessimism
nature lama
what's importance of probability in
physics and real life not important
see see my podcast on probability risk
and reward that kind of thing
for this but probability was designed
invented
to understand the results of games of
chance okay
rolling dice playing cards gambling
but even there it's only an
approximation to what really happens
that's the first thing
the fact that it was then
taken from there from that very
parochial thing about how gambling works
and applied
to
wildly diverse areas
like how to assess risk
how to understand quantum theory
the financial markets the fact that it
was used as a model for all of those
things great mistake great error it
doesn't track physical reality at all
and so i've done podcasts on this david
deutsch has done a lecture on this so
i've done a podcast breaking down the
lecture
probability is a scam i think david has
said it at some point it does nothing
actually ablaze the probability calculus
not even
the
things in a casino they only
approximately do but that's not reality
it's kind of like newtonian gravity now
can
you use probability to make some
decisions yeah like should you place a
bet on the lottery no why because the
probability is exceedingly low
approximately of you winning it
you shouldn't gamble but you know your
problem situation might be just to have
fun okay
i am
i have been known to gamble with my
brothers now and again it's fun it's
just fun to do
what else have we got
um
paul elof hi brett do you plan on
recording a deep dive into constructive
theory papers i would personally enjoy
to hear someone else's thoughts as they
go through these papers ct life in
particular oh look
maybe
maybe after i've done kiara marletto's
book the science of canaan can't once
i've completed that i think i've got
another chapter to go on that so that
serves i think as a reasonable
introduction to
uh constructive theory for the lay
person i'm a layperson in all of these
things
so
there are a number of good interviews
out there
with kiara
in particular
her collaborators
logan chipkin is someone who
has interviewed kiara and has a podcast
out there
with her i think shawn carroll
interviewed kiara about
a constructor theory as well so there
are some good interviews out there with
the people working on it and i think
they've broken down some of the stuff uh
very very well so what i
could add to that i don't know
beyond what i already have but never say
never i suppose so yeah quite possibly
uh new england barbell high brett what
is or was the most mind-bending
mind-explaining concept
that you have tried to comprehend
or and all comprehended what is the most
mind-bending thing
i don't know about most but i know what
the experience is like
um
of
mind-bending-ness and i remember when
the most profound
the most the i think the first time i
felt it
you know you go through school and
you're learning stuff that everyone else
is learning and so i can't remember i
guess my mind must have been blown at
various points throughout school
and learning about the universe even
when i was very young you know five six
years old or something
and so you have this experience of oh
there's more than just a planet oh
there's a universe and the universe
might go on forever maybe that was
mind-bending but i don't remember
i remember reading descartes meditations
in the first year of university when i
was like 17 18.
and i remember the sensation of
understanding for the first time what he
was saying
about
you can doubt everything
and that
was phenomenal
because up until then i'd had the
experience only of
well you know you can find out that
certain things are true and you
don't need to doubt them anymore
but descartes explains in the
meditations you can
and it was like
the floor falling away from underneath
you
when you begin to feel as if wow
you know a lot of what i
previously thought has just come into
question and then he has this profound
thing of
but in the act of doubting you exist
and that's so that's the one thing you
can't doubt and i thought wow that's
amazing now of course i reject that now
now i have criticisms of descartes but
at that that point it was a profoundly
mind-bending
expanding experience
it was
fallibilism almost he just didn't go the
extra step
and so then
you know the next
time i had that experience the next time
i had that was
because i was going through university
learning
quantum theory among other things but
quantum theory in particular and just
struggling to understand what the heck
does any of this mean the lecturers
weren't helping even
my great hero
paul davies wasn't helping reading his
books wasn't helping
and
told the story many times i picked up
the fabric of reality
got the chapter two red shadows
and there it was i mean there was the
explanation of what's going on in
quantum theory
in the interference experiments
suddenly it was clear
exactly what the day was and the moment
was i don't know i just remember the
sensation was exactly the same as i had
with daca
because
i immediately understood
oh
quantum
theory implies a multiverse
mind expanding mind
bending stuff
so whether or not that's the most but
those two things stand out in my mind
and i've had that you know again you
know you read the beginning of infinity
you have it again
in various ways
you're coming to understand something
that totally
shifts your worldview in some way
in the case of quantum mechanics
mind expanding because you realize wow
okay so
every possibility
really exists out there in some way
that's the multiverse that's what
quantum mechanics and that makes sense
and then realizing
well that's astonishing but also at the
same time well it's just the latest step
in the trend that's been going on
in human civilization coming to
understand our place in reality you know
we live on an earth well the earth is
actually part of the solar system well
salsa is part of a galaxy galaxy's part
of a wider universe ah the universe is
part of a multiverse okay so
yeah
yeah so although some people reject it i
just think well it's the next step but
still mind ending okay so that's where
we are with that
hello is the world more or less
dangerous when everyone has a universal
constructor under their mattress cheers
um
less
dangerous
less dangerous much less dangerous
um
whatever the bad thing is
that people might do with universal
constructors that the argument applies
for
any other technology as well
so that if if the bad guys have a
universal constructor
that can create the virus
presumably the good guys have a
universal constructor that can undo it
and better than that they have a
universal constructor that can work
faster
okay
i can imagine there could be universal
contractor is just that thing that can
build anything that's buildable but i
presume there will be different speeds
there'll be higher and lower quality
versions of them right like computers
computers operate at different speeds
now the bad guys are using their old you
know windows machine over there and the
good guys are using the equivalent of
the the apple universal constructor
so
you know who knows yeah something like
that so yeah i would say the world is
going to be less dangerous because
universal constructors will solve a
whole bunch of problems that would
otherwise cause us great danger
thanks mason mason said keep up the good
work
um
uh
john ortiz besides karl popper
what other philosophers are worth
reading
well
gosh again it depends on what you're
interested in
now popper is far and away the best for
just broad based understanding of stuff
but like you know i do like spinoza
although it's sort of metaphysical kind
of stuff
like worth reading there's a lot
contained within that sort of
if you're interested in the history of
philosophy as i am wittgenstein is worth
reading because almost everyone in
professional philosophy he thinks he's
one of the greatest geniuses of all time
i don't but you got to give the man
credit
for capturing the intellectual zeitgeist
so you better understand what he's
trying to say i think i understand what
he's trying to say i'm not that
impressed but you know other people
so
yeah
worth reading for that reason
descartes worth reading a humor is worth
reading
leibniz is worth okay
um
modern philosophers i like ein rand i
think that she's wrong on certain things
but i don't think there's a many better
defenses
of
capitalism and individual liberty
for example i think she's wrong on
epistemology
i think she's wrong on
aspects of morality
uh the importance of
institutions
traditions
traditions in particular actually um
tradition is very important in
maintaining
stability while undergoing rapid
progress as we talk about here a lot
and i think rand got that wrong but you
know
all that aside i think that's worth
reading um
dark goat his philosophy is very
optimistic speaking of optimism matt
ridley the rational optimist is a very
interesting book what are your thoughts
on matthews yeah it's very good i think
that he
like pinker
um
is
very very close to david deutch
it's just that
uh yeah he wrote a whole book on this
david deutsch
also written a whole book on it but
really you know there's that chapter
chapter nine optimism
um
that really explains
what's going on and the relation david
deutch has the deepest
exposition of optimism
the way in which
it's connected to
knowledge physics
morality
that's deep
that's the fundamental explanation of
what's going on with optimism that
problems are soluble all evils are due
to insufficient knowledge so therefore
you've got evil you've got morality
knowledge
you've got epistemology
what can be known what can possibly be
known is physics
optimism brings all these things in the
fact that you can you can solve problems
at all is optimism
okay and if it's not prohibited by the
laws of physics
then all you need is the right knowledge
okay so this is the fundamental
understanding
of
optimism so i think matt ridley is great
i think that just it's
emergent special cases of optimism all
the and it's almost like um
i don't want to say self-help it's not i
don't want to reduce it to that but
it has a less
cosmic um
kind of perspective i own but
i read the book only once and i just
thought yeah i agree with all this yeah
you know there was nothing that i found
that i
off the top of my head i particularly
disagreed with it's been a while i read
it soon after it first came out
um and
yeah so matt ridley great optimist
but i like
the deepest explanations which is what
deutsch gives yeah it's kind of the same
thing with
um pinka
provides often
15 different examples
when two would have done
in some of the books you know
um
you know books about how you know
things are getting better over time that
pinker has written
and it's like well yeah they have you
know you can make that case but he has
you read it and you go well yeah but
what's the deeper reason what's the
really deep reason why things are
getting better things are getting better
you've established that
we can agree
you in fact you made the point
four chapters ago you're still making
the point things are getting better
what's the reason you know and i think
you find the reason in the work of david
deutsch why it is that we have this
progress
going on not inevitable
but incremental
um
and and and and
explanations as to why it should
continue in a dynamic society
yeah
okay
um
tiesto edit why read books at all if you
can discover the answers that matter
inside of yourself
because it's more efficient
to
begin with some background knowledge
that's been tested
rediscovering things for yourself
from
scratch
means you can only make a lifetime's
worth of progress
but what you want is to make progress on
top of all the lifetimes that have
preceded us don't you you want to stand
on the shoulders of giants
when you read a book and you take on the
knowledge it's in a book you are
actually recreating that knowledge
and you may very well recreate it in a
slightly different way
an adapted way an improved way could be
worse could be improved but that's what
people do
when they when they come to a book they
bring their ideas with it and they can
change it and when they go and explain
it to
other people they can change it in
better and worse ways
as well okay
there's no method of communication
that's without ambiguity as we say it is
not possible to speak in such a way as
you cannot be misunderstood as karl
popper says
and so yeah it's
no good just discovering
the answers that matter inside of
yourself
if you want to make progress if you were
just to start from scratch on every
single thing expect to make
as much progress as
you know the caveman did
we're not cavemen we have this is why we
have libraries and knowledge and stuff
so we can
build upon
and not just start from scratch not
build upon nothing but build upon
something
todd abrams
what do you mean when you say monopolies
are the only possible enabled by the
government
i think they're so-called natural
monopolies
there are natural monopolies in the
markets when someone invents something
for the first time
i'm just going to have a little bit of
my
milkshake here
um
so this was made by a blender right
and
so
the first person to ever make a blender
an electric blender had a monopoly on
the market
by definition because there were no
other no other blenders had been
invented
same is true of the you know the the
iphone the smartphone right it's my
smartphone here
apple came out with the smartphone first
and had a natural monopoly
for what
a year or two i can't remember the
history of this but also long before
samsung came out with a copy
there are
there is no situation in which
a monopoly can be entrenched
unless government gets involved because
then force can be used literal force
guns and strong men can come along and
say you can't
do that you can't sell that thing
that's the only time you have a monopoly
i think
you know
less and less in australia now but i'm
pretty sure
in australia
letters might be the same in america in
the united states
but letters to people's houses you know
like you write a letter put it in an
envelope send it to someone
the only one legally able to deliver
that letter
i think
is australia post you know our post
offices
you can have couriers and stuff but
that's different
so i have a monopoly there are there are
various monopolies instantiated by
government i think monopoly the
government needs to be a monopoly on
violence
there should only be one police force
there should only be one military
but for everything else
things work best when you don't have um
force being used
and although
there might be situations where
it could be situations where
um
like with google let's say
particular service or good is provided
and persists over time for a long time
and basically dominates the market
google is not a monopoly
there is being and there are other
things out there
um now are they anywhere near as
dominant as google no not at all
but if the history of internet
the internet shows us anything at all
it's that anything you think is going to
stick around
netscape
irc
[Laughter]
icq
there are just so many myspace
anything you think is going to dominate
the market
is
not going to forever i don't think
google's going to be around forever i
think another search engine will come
along absolutely how long will it take
five years 10 years i don't know but
google does not have the power
the authority like when i say power i
mean the literal capacity to
bring strong men to your house and shut
you down and put you in jail or fine you
for not using their service the
government does
the government does the government
can create monopolies in the way okay
yeah so
okay i'm just going to triple check my
might call it a day here but i'll just
triple check my
twitter feed
and see if there are any other questions
that have come through
um
okay
lickesh is asked
um
he
what i'm trying to wrap my head around
he says
is that if the other verses in the
multiverse are essentially copies of our
verse then doesn't it mean that
evolution in those other verses took
place like for exactly the same way as
our verse so all the small details
happen in music
what's going on right now is that for
any
object and for any universe
there are uncountably
infinitely many fungible copies of that
thing which means absolutely identical
copies
and when a choice is made or a quantum
event happens
the object
and hence the universes
differentiate
there are uncountably infinite number of
universes where evolution took place
exactly the same way as it has here on
earth
but there are many many more universes
where evolution didn't take place as it
did here many more
because the mutations would have led to
other structures
um
yeah
so that that's what i would say about
that
do i have any video or source that talks
about this well if you've watched or you
say i oh you haven't watched all of my
videos about the multiverse theory
um well i haven't connected the
multiverse theory directly to evolution
i don't think but it's just a special
case
of things that could have been otherwise
whatever is physically possible in
evolution by natural selection actually
happens somewhere in the multiverse
the ones that are most resilient
uh the most resilient forms of life are
the ones that are going to
be most common
throughout the multiverse they occupy
the greatest measure
of universes
so that's one way to think about that um
but yeah beyond that
i don't have
anything else to say
um
what else have we got i think that's it
i think that's all the
questions
yeah what are your can't thoughts on
cryptocurrency yes i've answered that so
unless there are any final questions i
think that's it that's uh
nearly two hours
um
which i think is pretty good um for
today hopefully i can figure out how
exactly
to
set up a live stream in advance
so that when i go back in
it's a very easy process of starting the
live stream because today that didn't
work
i
provided a i provided a a link to the
live stream and thought okay i'll set it
up i've done this before
um
i did it the other day i trialed it
twice it worked and then this time
i go in to try and start the thing and
there's no button that says start so
still a noob
not efficient enough on this thing okay
so um
yeah until next time i suppose we'll end
it here now i don't know when i'll do
another one but look forward to the
next podcast which is going to be
well
me trying not to be mean about
the way in which bayesian reasoning is
used by so many intellectuals and
stephen pinker's
view of rationality
but increasingly my
exploration of that book is becoming
more and more a critique
than anything else because there's
sometimes i don't know where to begin
because it's just so wrong
in so many ways
human beings are not bayesian reasoners
induction is not a thing
and thinking that you can base
rationality on it
is terribly wrong and misguided and so
the next podcast is is that me trying to
politely explain
the ways in which this is a deficient
limited limiting view of rationality
okay but until the next live stream um
see you later bye